Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 1  
Timetable-based Transit Assignment Using Branch & Bound 
Authors: 
Markus Friedrich, PTV AG 
Stumpfstr. 1, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany 
Phone  ++49-721-9651316, fax  ++49-721-9651299, email  markus.friedrich@ptv.de 
Ingmar Hofsäß, PTV AG 
Stumpfstr. 1, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany 
Phone  ++49-721-9651312, fax  ++49-721-9651299, email  ingmar.hofsaess@ptv.de 
Steffen Wekeck, PTV AG 
Stumpfstr. 1, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany 
Phone  ++49-721-9651339, fax  ++49-721-9651299, email  steffen.wekeck@ptv.de 
 
Abstract: 
Transit assignment procedures need to reflect the constraints imposed by line routes and timetables. 
They require specific search algorithms considering transfers between transit lines with their precise trans-
fer time. The paper will present such an assignment procedure for transit networks using a timetable-based 
search algorithm. In contrast to existing timetable-based search methods employing a shortest path algo-
rithm, the described procedure constructs connections using branch & bound techniques. This approach 
significantly reduces computing time, thus facilitating the use of timetable-based assignment for big net-
works. At the same time it produces better results in cases where slow but cheap or direct connections 
compete with fast connections which are more expensive or require transfers. 
Keywords: 
Transit Assignment, Timetable-based Assignment, Public Transport Modeling 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 2  
1 INTRODUCTION 
Assignment procedures form the core of any comprehensive transportation model. Modelling a 
person’s travel behaviour on their journey from an origin to a destination, such procedures allow to 
distribute a given travel demand to a network. This results not only in traffic volumes for road links and 
transit lines but also in indicators describing the service quality of a network. 
For private transport assignment, often denoted as highway assignment, a huge number of publications 
(e.g. [1], [2]) can be found describing various solutions ranging from simple incremental procedures to 
equilibrium approaches and dynamic traffic assignment. Publications on public transport assignment, 
however, are comparatively rare. After several chapters on private transport assignment, textbooks often 
claim that the transit assignment problem is similar to the auto assignment problem. This, of course, is 
only partly true as a comparison of travel behaviour between car drivers and transit passengers shows: Car 
drivers may depart at any time and are free to choose a route which appears convenient to them. Travel 
behaviour of transit passengers, on the other hand, is strongly restricted by the line network and the 
timetable. In addition to choosing a route, transit passengers also select a departure time from the 
timetable, that is, they pick a connection. While a route only describes the spatial course of a trip within a 
network, a connection additionally encompasses temporal constraints such as departure and arrival times 
at the origin stop, the transfer stops, and the destination stop. 
Assignment procedures for a transit network need to reflect the constraints imposed by line routes and 
timetables. They require specific search algorithms considering transfers between transit lines with their 
precise transfer time. This type of timetable-based search algorithm can be found in passenger information 
systems provided by an increasing number of transit operators (e.g. www.bahn.de, www.sbb.ch, 
www.ns.nl). Here, the search algorithms are applied and optimised for a one-to-one type of problem, i.e. 
they calculate connections for one origin-destination (o-d) pair. Assignment in transport planning, 
however, needs to examine an entire network and its connections between all traffic zones. This extends 
the search problem to a many-to-many problem, which can produce long computing times for big nation-
wide networks. To ensure acceptable computing times, assignment models often apply simplified search 
algorithms based on average values  for the transfer time. These approaches reduce the problem by 
assuming that the wait times at the boarding stop or at transfer stops depend on the headway of the 
following transit line. This assumption speeds up computation but fails to consider the co-ordination of the 
timetable, which is essential in transit networks with long headways. 
This paper will present an assignment procedure for transit networks using a timetable-based search 
algorithm. In contrast to existing timetable-based search methods employing a shortest path algorithm, the 
described procedure constructs connections using branch & bound techniques. This approach significantly 
reduces computing time, thus facilitating the use of timetable-based assignment for big networks. At the 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 3  
same time it produces better results in cases where slow but cheap or direct connections compete with fast 
connections which are more expensive or require transfers. 
2 EXISTING APPROACHES 
Existing approaches for transit assignment can be divided into the categories line-based and timetable-
based: 
1. Line-based assignment simplifies the search by using average values for the transfer time (see [3], [4]). 
It models each transit line through a sequence of stops, through the running times between the stops 
and through the headway of the transit line. Transit lines with no fixed-rhythm headway are described 
by their mean headway. This procedure does not explicitly calculate transfer times but assumes that 
they depend on the headway. In other words, the co-ordination of the timetable is not considered. 
Usually, one assumes that the wait times at the boarding stop or at transfer stops is equal to half of the 
line’ s headway. Assignment based on lines guarantees acceptable assignment results only for urban 
areas with a dense network and short headways. 
2. Timetable-based assignment considers the timetable of each transit line with its exact departure and 
arrival times [4]. Using a shortest path algorithm, it is possible to dete rmine the “best“ connection 
between two traffic zones for a particular departure time. For different times of departure, various 
“best“ connections may be calculated differing in the used transit lines or transfer stops. Assignment 
based on timetable is the appropriate method when precise values for the transfer time and the service 
frequency are expected. This is especially important in rural areas or rail networks, where headways 
are long and the co-ordination of the timetable is important for the service quality. 
A timetable-based search using a shortest path algorithm unfortunately has two weaknesses: it may 
require long computing time and it may not find all relevant connections. The example displayed in Figure 
1 illustrates these weaknesses. The example network consists of a bus line and a train line. Passengers 
travelling from origin zone A to destination zone X may choose between direct connections provided by 
the bus and faster connections offered by the combination of bus and train: 
• Computation time : To determine all connections with a shortest path algorithm, it is necessary to 
perform a search for each possible departure time at the origin stop within the examined time interval. 
For the example network, this requires three search steps starting at 6:10, 6:55 and 7:25. In a real life 
network, more than 100 different departure times at a stop are common (e.g. 10 min headway, two 
directions, 18 hours operating time 
/c205 2161862 =⋅⋅  departures) resulting in long computation times as 
every departure time requires to build one shortest path tree. That this type of search routine may not 
be very efficient is illustrated in Figure 2, where 12 different departure times per hour at the origin stop 
O result in only four connections between stop O and stop D. Obviously, not every route search yields 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 4  
a new connection. Considering this phenomenon, it is possible to speed up the search process by 
limiting the number of departure times. This can be achieved either by randomly selecting a certain 
percentage of departure times or by searching only at predefined times, e.g. every 10 minutes. As an 
acceptable computing time may only be achieved through a significant reduction of departure times, 
this approach will usually fail to find all connections. 
Figure 1: Example network 
Line network 
X-City (Destination)
A-Village (Origin)
Station
Bus 1
Train
B-Village
  
Timetable  
6:00
6:30
7:00
7:30
8:00
Origin Destination
Bus 1
Bus 1
Bus 1
Station
Train
Train
Train
A-Village X-City B-Village
 
Timetable of Bus 1 Timetable of Train 
A-Village 6:10 6:55 7:25  Station 6:25 7:05 7:45 
Station 6:22 7:07 7:37  X-City 6:41 7:21 8:01 
B-Village 6:42 6:27 7:57      
X-City 6:55 7:40 8:10      
Connections  
No Departure Arrival In-Vehicle Time Transfer Time Ride Time No. of Transfers 
1 6:10 6:55 45 min 0 min 45 min 0 
2 6:10 6:41 28 min 3 min 31 min 1 
3 6:55 7:40 45 min 0 min 45 min 0 
4 7:25 8:10 45 min 0 min 45 min 0 
5 7:25 8:01 28 min 8 min 36 min 1 
       

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 5  
• Quality of results: Since the transit supply in some cases offers more than one connection for a given 
departure time (see example in Figure 1), a shortest path algorithm requires a definition of the "best ” 
connection. For this purpose, it is common to apply an impedance function which increases the imped-
ance of a connection for each transfer by means of a transfer penalty. A low penalty prefers time-
minimal connections, while a high penalty gives priority to connections with lower transfer 
frequencies. Varying the transfer penalty, however, increases the computation time as each transfer 
penalty requires an individual search step. Identifying all five connections in the example network of 
Figure 1 requires six search steps: three search steps with a penalty of 0 minutes ( /c205 connections 2, 3, 
5) and three search steps with a penalty of at least 15 minutes per transfer ( /c205 connections 1, 3, 4). The 
problem of defining an impedance function for the best connection increases with the introduction of 
fares. In a network with cheap low-speed trains and expensive high-speed trains, it is necessary to vary 
not only the transfer penalty but also the value of time. In such a network, even a connection which 
departs earlier and arrives later than an alternative connection may be attractive for some passengers, if 
it is cheaper or requires fewer transfers. 
Figure 2: Departure times at an origin stop: 12 departure times per hour at stop O result in only 
four connections between O and D. 
Bus: 10 min headway
10 min run time
dep.
6:00
6:10
6:20
6:30
6:40
6:50
⋅⋅⋅
dep.
6:03
6:13
6:23
6:33
6:43
6:53
⋅⋅⋅
Train 15 min headway
dep.
6:12
6:27
6:42
6:57
⋅⋅⋅
 
 
Extensive analysis of the shortcomings of a timetable-based search procedure using a shortest path 
algorithm and requirements of European railway companies (German Railways DB AG & DB Regio, 
Danish Railways DSB) to model railway networks on a national and European level, initiated the 
development of a new search routine for transit assignment, i.e. for a many-to-many search problem. After 
analysing several possible methods, an approach was chosen which is based on works by FRIEDRICH 
[5]. As his branch & bound approach, developed in 1994, uses a preprocessing step which requires more 
computer memory than conventional shortest path algorithms, the method could only now be adapted for 
big networks to work on standard PCs. 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 6  
3 TRANSIT ASSIGNMENT WITH BRANCH & BOUND 
3.1 Preprocessing 
The objective of the preprocessing step is the generation of connection segments, which describe a part 
of a journey. These connection segments are concatenated to connections later in the connection search 
process. A connection segment represents either a walk or a transfer-free ride on one transit line. A 
connection made up of an access walk, a bus ride and an egress walk, for example, consists of three 
connection segments. 
From the line route data, an initial step generates an array in which the network ’s route segments are 
stored (see Figure 3). A single route segment describes either 
• a segment of a transit line between a boarding stop and an alighting stop or 
• a single walk link or a sequence of walk links for access, egress or transfer walks. 
Walk link sequences are calculated by applying a shortest path algorithm to the links of the network 
which are permitted for “transit walks ”. A route segment is defined by the attributes initial stop node, 
terminal stop node, length and running time. It also points to the used transit line or the sequence of 
walking links respectively. The route segment array is sorted in an appropriate way to create connection 
segments in the next step. 
Figure 3: Route segments and connection segments 
Stop 1: Terminal
RS6
RS4RS5
RS2RS3 RS1
Stop 2
Stop 3
Stop 4: Terminal  
Route segments RS for one direction of a transit 
line: 
• Route segment 1 from stop 1 to stop 2 
• Route segment 2 from stop 1 to stop 3 
• Route segment 3 from stop 1 to stop 4 
• Route segment 4 from stop 2 to stop 3 
• Route segment 5 from stop 2 to stop 4 
• Route segment 6 from stop 3 to stop 4 
Number of connection segments CS for one 
direction d of a transit line: 
() knnCSd ⋅⋅−= 2
1  
where 
n = number of stops 
k = number of services (vehicle trips) 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 7  
Subsequently, connection segments (or connection legs) are calculated from the sorted list of route 
segments. A connection segment using a transit line is endowed with a departure and an arrival time, 
whereas connection segments using walk links do not possess specific times, since they are available to 
the traveller at any time. 
The connection segments are again stored in a sorted array. Special data structures provide tools such 
as finding the next connection segment for a given node and point of time or traversing all connections 
originating from a fixed node. Figure 4 shows the route and connection segments for the example network 
of Figure 1, not considering the access and egress walk links, which are assumed to be 0 minutes. 
Figure 4: Route segments and connection segments for the example network 
Route Segments Connection Segments 
Route Segment No From Node To Node Transit Line Connection Segment No Departure Arrival 
1 A-Village Station Bus 1 1 6:10 6:22 
    2 6:55 7:07 
    3 7:25 7:37 
2 A-Village B-Village Bus 1 4 6:10 6:42 
    5 6:55 7:27 
    6 7:25 7:57 
3 A-Village X-City Bus 1 7 6:10 6:55 
    8 6:55 7:40 
    9 7:25 8:10 
4 Station B-Village Bus 1 10 6:22 6:42 
    11 7:07 7:27 
    12 7:37 7:57 
5 Station X-City Bus 1 13 6:22 6:55 
    14 7:07 7:40 
    15 7:37 8:10 
6 B-Village X-City Bus 1 16 6:42 6:55 
    17 7:27 7:40 
    18 7:57 8:10 
7 Station X-City Train 19 6:25 6:41 
    20 7:05 7:21 
    21 7:45 8:01 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 8  
3.2 Connection Search 
A dynamic, i.e. time-dependent, multi-path algorithm is applied to determine all potential connections. 
This algorithm builds a connection tree (see Figure 5) which may contain several paths (connections) from 
the origin to a destination node. Since the tree ’s width largely depends on the service frequency of the 
transit lines, it may be much wider than a usual shortest-path tree. On the other hand, the use of entire 
connection legs as tree edges simplifies the tree ’s structure to a great extent and limits its depth by the 
maximum number of transfers. A typical value of this user-defined constant is 4 or 5. Since the 
algorithm’s speed depends linearly on the tree ’s width but exponentially on its depth, the procedure 
behaves nicely in terms of computation time. 
Figure 5 outlines the structure of the connection tree. The root of the tree is the centroid node of the 
origin zone and the only outgoing branch represents the access from the origin to the first transit stop. 
Figure 5: Structure of the connection tree 
walking link
arr.
walking link
depth
width
walking link
level 1
origin
boarding stop
destination
destination
branches
alighting stop
boarding stop
alighting stop
transfer stopconnection segment
dep.
arr.
connection segment
arr.
connection segment
dep.
dep.
level 2 level 3 level 4level 0
 
 
The following parameters are used to describe the characteristics of a connection c : 
• journey time )(cJT , departure time )(cDEP  and arrival time )(cARR  
• number of transfers )(cNT  and transfer time )(cTT  
• fare ∑∈ ⋅+= )( ))(()( cIi iii SDcLSFcFARE , where )(cI  is the set of all transit lines used by c . In 
this way, the fare of transit line i  may include a fixed supplement iSF  and a distance-based fare 
ii SDcL ⋅)( , where )(cLi  is the distance covered with transit line i . 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 9  
Then, the total (search) impedance )(cIMP of a connection is defined as 
)()()()( 321 cFAREacNTacJTacIMP ⋅+⋅+⋅= , 
where 1a , 2a  and 3a are global user-defined constants. 
Starting from the origin node, a branch & bound strategy is employed. Given a connection segment 
from the current tree level, all possible successors are considered. Thanks to the data structures established 
in earlier steps, these succeeding segments can be traversed without additional data access time. 
Now, let 
∗
yxs ,  be the currently processed connection segment starting at network node x  and termi-
nating at network node y . Let *
yc  be the new connection between the origin node and y  formed by 
adding ∗
yxs ,  to connection *
xc  arriving at x . Finally, let yC be the set of all known connections to y . 
∗
yxs ,  is inserted into the tree as an appendix of connection *
xc , if and only if the following conditions hold: 
• Temporal suitability:  The connection segment ∗
yxs ,  departs from node x  only after the arrival of 
connection *
xc  plus a minimum transfer wait time MINTWT , and before a user-defined maximum 
transfer wait time MAXTWT  has elapsed: 
[] MAXTWTMINTWTcARRsDEP xyx ;)()( **
, ∈−  
• Relevance: There is no known connection yCc∈  such that 
)()( *
ycDEPcDEP ≥  and )()( *
ycARRcARR ≤  and )()( *
ycIMPcIMP ≤  and )()( *
ycNTcNT ≤ . 
In other words, if *
yc  has the property that for all known connections c  to y , *
yc  departs later or 
arrives earlier or has a lower impedance or a lower number of transfers than c , *
yc  will be inserted. To 
facilitate comparisons between elements of yC , these sets are stored in lists which are sorted by arrival 
time. 
• Tolerance constraints: None of the following rules is violated: 
21
* )(min)( bcIMPbcIMP
yCcy +⋅≤ ∈  
21
* )(min)( dcJTdcJT
yCcy +⋅≤ ∈  
21
* )(min)( ecNTecNT
yCcy +⋅≤ ∈  
MAXNTcNT y ≤)( * , 
where all ib , id  and ie  are user-specified global tolerance parameters and MAXNT  is the also user-
defined bound for the number of transfers within a connection. 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 10  
• Loops: Transfers within a transit line are only allowed for lines containing a loop, provided that the 
passenger can save time by boarding an earlier service trip at the intersection node of the route loop. 
A tree level is traversed completely before connection segments of the next level are considered. For 
this purpose, we hold two queues storing unprocessed segments of the current and the next level 
respectively. The procedure terminates when the queues are empty or the maximum number of transfers is 
reached. 
With regard to the accessibility of the algorithm ’s outcome, some search information is stored for each 
of the network nodes. It comprises the shortest journey time, the shortest walking time, the minimum 
number of transfers and the minimum fare taken over all connections to that node established up to the 
present. Other values describing the overall characteristics of a connection are passed through all corre-
sponding branches.  
3.3 Connection Choice 
The set of connections stored in the connection tree needs to be re-evaluated in order to identify and 
delete illogical connections (e.g. equal departure time with later arrival time and more transfers), which 
have not been rejected by the search algorithm. 
In the search algorithm, tolerance constraints like 
21
* )(min)( dcJTdcJT
yCcy +⋅≤ ∈  (see above) are 
applied to a newly-found connection *
yc . In this way, those conditions are checked at every intermediate 
node y  of a connection. Therefore, the tolerance parameters ib , id  and ie  should not generate too strict 
constraints, since too may connections would be discarded as a result. 
The connection choice step enables the user to specify stricter conditions for the entire connection. 
This is realised by the same set of tolerance constraints, where this time the constants ib , id  and ie  can 
be chosen smaller. Typical values of 1d , for instance, may range between 1.2 and 1.8 to reflect the fact 
that a traveller is not willing to use connections significantly slower than the fastest available. 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 11  
3.4 Connection Split 
The final assignment step simulates the passengers ’ choice among the remaining set of connections. It 
is assumed that their decisions are based on the perceived journey time, the difference between the desired 
and the actual departure time and the fare. 
The perceived journey time is a user-defined function of the actual journey time, the transfer time and 
related quantities. A typical definition is 
)(2)(2)(:)( cNTcTTcJTcPJT ⋅+⋅+= . 
A temporal distribution of the travel demand serves as the input for the connection split. For practical 
purposes, this distribution is discretised in equidistant time intervals (e.g. hours) with constant travel 
demand. For such a time interval a , let )(aC  be the set of the connections departing in this period. The 
formula for the impedance of a connection c  in time interval a  is 
)()()(:)( 321 cFAREqcUqcPJTqcIMP aa ⋅+⋅+⋅= , 
where )(cUa  is the temporal utility for passengers departing in time interval a  and 1q , 2q , 3q  are user-
set global constants. Note that the concept of impedance introduced for the search is re-adjusted to the 
requirements of the connection split. The temporal utility function )(cUa  models the difference between 
the riders ’ desired and the actual departure time of c . Usually, 0)( =cUa  for all )(aCc∈  and 
0)( >cUa  for all )(aCc∉ , where the graph of )(cUa  increases monotonously outside a . 
Denote by C  the set of all connections. The part of the travel demand of time interval a  assigned to 
connection Cc∈  will be calculated by means of a utility function which also takes into consideration the 
“independence” of c . The independence of a connection Cc∈  is defined as 
()∑∑
≠∈∈
+==
ccCc
c
Cc
c cfcfcIND
’,’’
’1
1
)’(
1:)( , 
where cf  is an appropriate non-negative evaluation function, for which 1)( =cfc  and 1)’( ≤cfc  
Ccc ∈∀ ’, . The purpose of cf  is to model the impact of other connections on c . The general rule is: the 
greater the similarity of two connections, the higher the impact on one another. If there are differences in 
terms of perceived journey time and fare, the superior connection will exert a stronger influence on the 
inferior one than vice versa. This concept of asymmetry is indispensable for )(cIND to perform 
properly. cf  might be defined as follows: 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 12  














⋅
⋅+⋅⋅−⋅




−=
+
zy
cycz
x
c
c
ss
czscys
s
cxcf |)’(||)’(|,1min1)’(1:)’( γ , 
where () 2/)’()()’()(:)’( cARRcARRcDEPcDEPcxc −+−=  is the temporal similarity of c  and 
’c , )()’(:)’( cPJTcPJTcyc −=  the advantage of c  with respect to the perceived journey time and 
)()’(:)’( cFAREcFAREczc −=  the corresponding value with respect to the fare. xs , ys  and zs  set the 
range of influence of the three variables and γ is a global parameter. ys  and zs  depend on the signs of 
)’(cyc  and )’(czc  in order to model the asymmetry mentioned above. Among other aspects, such an 
evaluation function penalizes short lags between departure times meaning that connections with identical 
or similar departure times are assigned a lesser independence. 
For the final assignment step, define the Box-Cox transformation as the following parameterized function 
of )(cIMPa : 



=
≠−
=
.0))(log(
01)(
:))(()(
tifcIMP
tift
cIMP
cIMPb
a
t
a
a
t  
Denote by )(cPa  the portion of the demand )(aDEM  of time interval a  which is assigned to 
connection c . Using the MNL model enhanced by the new attribute of independence, )(cPa  is defined as 
()
)(
)(
)(:)(
’
))((
))((
)(
)(
aDEM
cINDe
cINDecP
Cc
cIMPb
cIMPb
a
a
t
a
t
⋅
⋅
⋅=
∑∈
⋅−
⋅−
β
β
, 
where β is a positive parameter. Now, the effect of the concept of independence can be made clear 
quite easily. Consider the following simple example where 120)( =aDEM  passengers are faced with 
several connections in time interval ]00:9,00:8[=a . Since all connections depart within a , it is 
assumed that 0)( =cUa  for all )(aCc∈ , meaning that the travellers are indifferent as to the precise 
departure time within a . For simplicity, let 11 =q  and 032 ==qq . The evaluation functions used are the 
cf  defined above. Letting 2=β  and 0=t  gives the standard Kirchhoff distribution. 
The first example (Figure 6) shows three identical connections with a fixed headway. All connections 
are independent, so that IND(c) is always equal to 1.0 and each connection is assigned the same amount of 
passengers. 

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 13  
Figure 6: Connection split example 1 – three connections with a fixed headway 
c DEP(c) PJT(c) IND(c) Pa(c) not using IND(c) Pa(c) using IND(c) 
1 8:15 20 min 1.00 40 40 
2 8:30 20 min 1.00 40 40 
4 8:45 20 min 1.00 40 40 
 
In the second example (Figure 7) a further connection is added which departs at the same time as 
connection 2. Here the use of IND(c) causes the split to assign just as many passengers to connections 2 
and 3 as to each one of the connections 1 and 4. In this way, it is taken into account that 2 and 3 are in fact 
only one connection.  
Figure 7: Connection split example 2 - insertion of a connection with simultaneous departure time 
c DEP(c) PJT(c) IND(c) Pa(c) not using IND(c) Pa(c) using IND(c) 
1 8:15 20 min 1.00 30 40 
2 8:30 20 min 0.50 30 20 
3 8:30 20 min 0.50 30 20 
4 8:45 20 min 1.00 30 40 
 
The third example (Figure 8) shows the impact of an express connection on the distribution. Without 
IND(c), the express connection 3 detracts equally many passengers from all other connections, although 
its impact on connection 1 may assumed to be weaker than on the neighboring connections 2 and 4. The 
figure shows that this aspect is considered when IND(c) is used. 
Figure 8: Connection split example 3 - insertion of an express connection 
c DEP(c) PJT(c) IND(c) Pa(c) not using IND(c) Pa(c) using IND(c) 
1 8:15 20 min 1.00 25 27 
2 8:30 20 min 0.86 25 23 
3 8:40 15 min 0.94 45 46 
4 8:45 20 min 0.86 25 23 
 
4 APPLICATION AND CONCLUSION 
The main motivation for the development of the presented transit assignment method were complaints 
about computation time. For example, transportation planners of German Railways using the timetable-
based transit assignment implemented in the transportation model VISUM [6] came up with computation 
times of more than 24 hours for the German train network. Reasonably, they asked for a transit assignment 
which would run overnight, ideally not just for the German network but also for a European network.  

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 14  
Figure 9 shows the main parameters describing the German train network model. For this network, a 
search procedure using a shortest path algorithm builds a shortest path tree for one departure time at an 
origin node in about one second on a 500 MHz Pentium 3 computer. This is a good response time for an 
interactive connection search. Applying this search procedure to an assignment problem of the given size, 
however, results in a total computation time of 32.5 hours, if every departure time is considered. Even a 
reduced search with only 4 randomly selected departure times per hour and 18 hours operating time (= 
72184 =⋅  departures per zone) would require approximately 10 hours of computing time. In contrast, the 
branch & bound search, which is now also implemented in VISUM, completes the assignment about 20 
times faster in only 1.6 hours. Instead of computing an average of 220 shortest path trees for every zone, 
the branch & bound search builds just one connection tree per zone. This approach of constructing only 
one connection tree from preprocessed connection segments obviously speeds up the search procedure. At 
the same time, it expects more computer memory for storing the route and connection segments. The 
German train network with 2.7 million connection segments requires an extra of about 50 MByte RAM. 
This, however, does not create a problem for current standard PCs with 256 or 512 MByte of RAM.  
Beside the significant gains in computing time, the branch & bound search increases the quality of 
results as it tends to find more connections. This applies especially for cases, where two connections have 
the same departure times or where passengers can choose between cheaper low-speed trains and more 
expensive high-speed trains. Here, a shortest path search always has to cope with the problem that it will 
identify either the fastest or the cheapest or the minimum transfer connection. The branch & bound search, 
on the other hand, behaves more robustly in such cases. The introduction of flexible tolerance parameters 
in combination with the multi-path connection tree permits to host connections with varying indicators for 
time, cost and number of transfers. 
Including private transport links in the preprocessing step allows a straightforward extension of the 
branch & bound search to park & ride traffic. For this purpose, the preprocessing step would also have to 
determine private transport route segments between traffic zones and park & ride transit stops as a 
sequence of road links. Private transport route segments could then be included in the search procedure 
just like walking links, but with the additional constraint that they only occur as the first or the last 
segment. Considering that returning travellers need to collect their private transport vehicle at the same 
stop where they parked it, an intermodal park & ride assignment additionally would need to store the most 
likely park & ride stop for every o-d pair.  

Friedrich, Hofsäß, Wekeck 15  
Figure 9: Performance of timetable-based assignment 
German train network model 
no. of traffic zones 531 
no. of transit stops 6,300 
no. of lines with identical line route and running time 3,040 
no. of vehicle trips (services) per day  31,600 
mean no. of departure times per traffic zone 220 
no. of route segments 273,000 
no. of connection segments 2,737,000 
Computing time* with shortest path search 
• mean computing time for one departure time (= one shortest path tree) 
• mean computing time for one zone  
• total computing time 
1 sec 
220 sec 
32.5 h 
Computing time* with branch & bound search 
• computing time for preprocessing 
• mean computing time for one zone  
• total computing time 
20 sec 
11 sec 
1.6 h 
* Computing time using a 500 MHz Pentium 3 Computer 
 
5 REFERENCES 
1. Ort úzar, J. D., Willumsen, L. G.: Modelling Transport, Wiley, Chichester, 1990. 
2. Schnabel, W., Lohse, D.: Grundlagen der Straßenverkehrstechnik und der Verkehrsplanung , Volume 
2, Verlag für Bauwesen, Berlin, 1997. 
3. Spiess, H., Florian, M.: Optimal Strategies: A New Assignment Model For Transit Networks, in 
Transportation Research, 23B(2), 82-102, 1989 
4. Friedrich, M.: Modelling Public Transport - A European Approach. Preprint CD-ROM of 78 th Annual 
Meeting, Transport Research Board, Washington, 1999. 
5. Friedrich, M.: Rechnergest ütztes Entwurfsverfahren f ür den ÖPNV im l ändlichen Raum ( “Computer 
assisted design of public transport systems in rural areas ”), in Schriftenreihe des Lehrstuhls f ür 
Verkehrs- und Stadtplanung, Volume 5, Technical University of Munich, 1994. 
6. PTV AG: VISUM, http://www.english.ptv.de/produkte.htm, July 2000 